# Introduction to BigQuery monitoring

Monitoring and logging are crucial for running reliable applications in the
cloud. BigQuery workloads are no exception, especially if your workload
has high volumes or is mission critical. This document provides a high-level
overview of the monitoring data that is available for BigQuery.

Monitoring and logging sources can vary based on the frequency of sampling or
aggregation. For example, information schema data might be available at a
higher level of granularity than Cloud Monitoring metrics data.

As a result, graphs of metrics with lower granularity might appear to diverge
from comparable information schema statistics. Aggregation will tend to smooth
out the discrepancies. When you design a monitoring solution, assess the
request response time, precision, and accuracy of the metrics against your
requirements.

## Metrics

Metrics are numerical values that are collected at regular
intervals and made available for analysis. You can use metrics to:

- Create charts and dashboards.
- Trigger alerts for conditions or situations that need human intervention.
- Analyze historical performance.

In the case of BigQuery, the available metrics include the number
of jobs that are running, how many bytes were scanned during a query, and the
distribution of query times. The metrics for a query only
become available after the query succeeds and can take up to seven minutes to be
reported. Metrics for queries that fail are not reported. For a complete list of
available metrics including their sample rates, visibility, and limitations, see
[`bigquery`](https://docs.cloud.google.com/monitoring/api/metrics_gcp_a_b#gcp-bigquery) under
[Google Cloud metrics](https://docs.cloud.google.com/monitoring/api/metrics_gcp).

Use [Cloud Monitoring](https://docs.cloud.google.com/monitoring/docs) to view BigQuery
metrics and create charts and alerts. Each metric has a resource type, either
`bigquery_dataset`, `bigquery_project`, or `global`, and a set of labels. You
can group or filter each metric by using the labels.

For example, to chart the number of interactive queries in flight, use the
following PromQL statement, which filters by `priority` equal to `interactive`:

    {"bigquery.googleapis.com/query/count", monitored_resource="global", priority="interactive"}

The next example gets the number of load jobs in flight, grouped into 10-minute
intervals:

    avg_over_time({"bigquery.googleapis.com/job/num_in_flight",
      monitored_resource="bigquery_project",
      job_type="load"
    }[10m])

For more information, see
[Creating charts and alerts for BigQuery](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/monitoring-dashboard).

## Logs

Logs are text records that are generated in response to particular events or
actions. BigQuery creates log entries for actions such as
creating or deleting a table, purchasing slots, or running a load job. For more
information about logging in Google Cloud, see
[Cloud Logging](https://docs.cloud.google.com/logging/docs).

A log is an append-only collection of log entries. For example, you could write
your own log entries to a log named
`projects/PROJECT_ID/logs/my-test-log`. Many
Google Cloud services, including BigQuery, create a type of
log called [audit logs](https://docs.cloud.google.com/logging/docs/audit). These logs record:

- Administrative activity, such as creating or modifying resources.
- Data access, such as reading user-provided data from a resource.
- System events that are generated by Google systems, rather than by user actions.

Audit logs are written in a structured JSON format. The base data type for
Google Cloud log entries is the
[`LogEntry`](https://docs.cloud.google.com/logging/docs/reference/v2/rest/v2/LogEntry) structure. This
structure contains the name of the log, the resource that generated the log
entry, the timestamp (UTC), and other basic information.

The details of the logged event are contained in a subfield called the *payload*
field. For audit logs, the payload field is named `protoPayload`. The value of
this field is an
[`AuditLog`](https://docs.cloud.google.com/logging/docs/reference/audit/auditlog/rest/Shared.Types/AuditLog)
structure, indicated by the value of the `protoPayload.@type` field, which is
set to `type.googleapis.com/google.cloud.audit.AuditLog`.

For operations on datasets, tables, and jobs, BigQuery writes
audit logs in two different formats, although both share the `AuditLog` base
type.

In the older format:

- The `resource.type` field is `bigquery_resource`.
- Details about the operation are written to the `protoPayload.serviceData` field. The value of this field is an [`AuditData`](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/auditlogs/rest/Shared.Types/AuditData) structure.

In the newer format:

- The `resource.type` field is either `bigquery_project` or `bigquery_dataset`. The `bigquery_project` resource has log entries about jobs, while the `bigquery_dataset` resource has log entries about storage.
- Details about the operation are written to the `protoPayload.metadata` field. The value of this field is a [`BigQueryAuditMetadata`](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/auditlogs/rest/Shared.Types/BigQueryAuditMetadata) structure.

We recommend consuming logs in the newer format. For more information, see
[Audit logs migration guide](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/auditlogs/migration).

Here is an abbreviated example of a log entry that shows a failed operation:

    {
      "protoPayload": {
        "@type": "type.googleapis.com/google.cloud.audit.AuditLog",
        "status": {
          "code": 5,
          "message": "Not found: Dataset my-project:my-dataset was not found in location US"
        },
        "authenticationInfo": { ... },
        "requestMetadata":  { ... },
        "serviceName": "bigquery.googleapis.com",
        "methodName": "google.cloud.bigquery.v2.JobService.InsertJob",
        "metadata": {
      },
      "resource": {
        "type": "bigquery_project",
        "labels": { .. },
      },
      "severity": "ERROR",
      "logName": "projects/my-project/logs/cloudaudit.googleapis.com%2Fdata_access",
      ...
    }

For operations on BigQuery Reservations, the `protoPayload` is an
[`AuditLog`](https://docs.cloud.google.com/logging/docs/reference/audit/auditlog/rest/Shared.Types/AuditLog)
structure, and the `protoPayload.request` and `protoPayload.response` fields
contain more information. You can find the field definitions in
[BigQuery Reservation API](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/reservations/rpc). For more
information, see
[Monitoring BigQuery Reservations](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reservations-monitoring).

## BigQuery `INFORMATION_SCHEMA` views

[`INFORMATION_SCHEMA`](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/information-schema-intro) views are
another source of insights in BigQuery, which you can use in
conjunction with metrics and logs.

These views contain metadata about jobs, datasets, tables, and other
BigQuery entities. For example, you can get real-time metadata
about which BigQuery jobs ran over a specified time period, and
then group or filter the results by project, user, tables referenced, and other
dimensions.

You can use this information to perform more detailed analysis about your
BigQuery workloads, and answer questions like:

- What is the average slot utilization for all queries over the past 7 days for a given project?
- Which users submitted a batch load job for a given project?
- What streaming errors occurred in the past 30 minutes, grouped by error code?

In particular, look at [jobs metadata](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/information-schema-jobs),
[streaming metadata](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/information-schema-streaming), and
[reservations metadata](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/information-schema-reservations) to
get insights into the performance of your BigQuery workloads.

You can find [example `INFORMATION_SCHEMA` queries on
GitHub](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/bigquery-utils/tree/master/dashboards/system_tables)
that show an organization's slot and reservation utilization, job execution,
and job errors. For example, the following query provides a list of
queries that are either pending or running. These queries are ordered
by the length of time since they were created in the `us` region:

```
SELECT
    creation_time,
    project_id,
    user_email,
    job_id,
    job_type,
    priority,
    state,
    TIMESTAMP_DIFF(CURRENT_TIMESTAMP(), start_time,second) as running_time_sec
 FROM
   `region-us`.INFORMATION_SCHEMA.JOBS_BY_PROJECT
 WHERE
    creation_time BETWEEN TIMESTAMP_SUB(CURRENT_TIMESTAMP(), INTERVAL 1 DAY) AND CURRENT_TIMESTAMP()
    AND state != "DONE"
ORDER BY
    running_time_sec DESC
```

For more information, see [Troubleshoot BigQuery performance with
these dashboards](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/data-analytics/troubleshoot-bigquery-performance-with-these-dashboards).

If you have slot reservations, then in addition to writing your own query, you
can use BigQuery Admin Resource Charts to view charts that
display slot usage, job concurrency, and job run time. For more information, see
[Monitor health, resource utilization, and jobs](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/admin-resource-charts).

## What's next

- Learn how to [monitor resource utilization and jobs](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/admin-resource-charts).
- Learn how to [create charts and alerts for BigQuery](https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/monitoring-dashboard).